---
title: "Aquatic Ecology" 
author: "Keelan Krinsky"
output: pdf_document

---

# Imports

import Modules/EvaporativePotential as ep

import Modules/AquaticEcosystemTaxonomy as AquaticEcosystemTaxonomy

import Modules/SARiverDistribution as SARiverDistribution

import Modules/WaterQuality as WaterQuality

import Modules/Rivers as Rivers

import Modules/Wetlands as Wetlands

import Modules/SavannaHydrology as SH

import Modules/MatterCycles as MatterCycles

import Modules/FreshWaterOrganisms as FWO

import Modules/InvasiveAquaticSpecies as InasiveAquaticSpecies

# Aquatic Ecology

## Background

### __ep: Evaporative Potential__

### __AquaticEcosystemTaxonomy: Aquatic Ecosystem Taxonomy__ 

### __SARiverDistribution: South African River Distribution__

### __MatterCycles: Matter Cycles__

## __WaterQuality: Water Quality__
 
## __Rivers: Rivers__

## __Wetlands: Wetlands__

## __FWO: Fresh Water Organisms__

## __SH: Savanna Hydrology__

## __InvasiveAquaticSpecies: Invasive Aquatic Species__
 
## Examples

### Case studies 

#### Ganges river
highest salt load, largest river delta in the world.### Case studies 

##### Problem statement
lots of people dependant on river. 
$>80\%$ of pollution is domestic
too much used for irrigation. Silt grossly polluting assimilative capacity stressed

Defection on banks,mass bathing and ritualistic practises. $40\%$ India dep, drinking water.


### Plan of action. 

#### Legislation 

#### 
i


# Course Information

## practical report
1. Table of summary statistics
  2. bar chart
3. How to generate mean sand standard errors. 
4. Table of t test results. 


## Assignments

# Report
overall aim, to look at urbanisation, 

Objective two measure the community structure
determine physiochemical parameters. (abiotic drivers )
habitat assessments 
bio-indicators (biotic )
statistical analysis. 

Work out present ecological status for Magalies for each (a score from A to H)

Highveld Eco region, vs western/ region. 

Table must below the in text reference to it. The paper was written in the past tense. Use references for methods (modified version) check units used. (NTU's used for dissolved solids, remember data is a plural). Masters report. Add GPS coordinates. 

Driver variables, then biotic variables, details and sufficient but not exhaustive. 

Student t-test, 

SASS Score and ASPT score, plot ASPT against SASS, and see which biological band it falls within. 

Variables, t score and degrees of freedom, p value. 

# New notes


## Estuaries
The mout will noramlly move around a bit, may be fixed by human activity. A perched estury is closed by the water will dfrain if a channneel operns. 


>DEFINITION: Broudly defined as---

The estuary is a good indicator of the state of the entrie catchemtn (as it is a meeting point). 
As the ocean has salinity of 35PSU, and water is abour o,5g/L, So the more dense esturary water will try to push in at the bottom with freshwater trying to push out at the top, the density difference will lead to limmited mixing, and a salt gradient is established, the esturary can become totally fresh if a burm forms adn supply from river, however smoe esturies become hypersaline due to evaporation (if a berm forms) normally about 42 PSU. A lot of sediment can be introduced to the sea from this point. Because so much water is removed the point has become permanently eutrophic, and the river is often closed. S

Holocene Epoch 11,700 years, is referred to as the age of the Estuary all present day estuaries are about 5000 years old due to seal level rises,---

Sea level change Sea level changes Estuaries are extremely productive supplying many ecosystem services, Estuaries are extremely productive providing a wide variety of ecosystem services. 

Good for harbours. 
nursery for small habitatis, congregation of human population, fine silts clean water. require protection, support large marrine fisheries. For example shad migrating up transcy come fromgrate burn estuary. 

### Division 

#### Upper reaches
narrow dominated by river, with very course sand, quartzite type sand. 
river water typically muddy if flow is high and clear if flow is low, the tidal variation is very small, even negligible at this point. 
 domianted by cosmaties astrallus.

 High tannin stain in toe river by the wilderness. 

 bushmans estuary close to PE, sedgesm and fragmanties quit saline only freshwater right up at the top. 

 davinhoks, very dary tannin stained, fragmaties terrestrial, relatively prestine. 

 tidal flucuation becomes more and more dominaint, the intertidal zone becomes wider and wider, the mixing of sean water and river water and tidal currents creat a maxiumum turbidity zone or river-estuary interface: REI, the most productive area odf the estuary. This area tends to be the most productive part ofth estuary 

 intertidal xones, dominanted by extensive salt marshes, or in usbtropic, KZN, and transky, plant mangroves. The fine sedinemts sink out, high clay solt and organic matter conent nuctrient rich, becomes anoxic (the sand) a few mm below the surface. 

 Diatoms, come up to the surface and migrate, then migrate down into sendiment before tide comes in, produce very carbon rich mussalate which feeds snails, crabs, bacteria. MOved into laboritotry keep tidal rythms for a few days. 

 The banks in middle to lwoer reaches usually lined with houses 


 For example grootbrach estuary. Lots of birds attracted. IF freshwater is seeping in through the sediment then fragmaties are rpesent. Heavily urbanised become eutrophic when mouth closes thicvk filamentus alge filadopherea clogs up estuary. Mud thick with idatom biofilms so very productive, people has grass all the way down so no trees knysa estuary pumped raw severage, pumped chlorine in Algae took up entire intertidal zone. zinkwasi. 

 lower reach, mouth area 
 strongly dominated by the marrine, very tidal, flooding tide psuhes clear water and course parrine sand into the estuary . typically find a flood tide delta made otu of marine sands. from high tide to low tide. eebing tide delta formed on the marrine side of the esturary. esturies which do close to the sea $72\%$ from the sea, water harvesting upstream can also close esutary, temporary open/closed estuaries. 

 surrounded bytemperary salt marshes and mangroves, prime tourist destination, used for deepwater ports, such as Durban harbour and deep water ports. 

 Estuaries can be artificially opened by canals. Can form very distinct tide line due to density difference preventing mixing. Risk of alien invasives could be spread to other estuaries in big flood. Sand burn can go to about 4.2m high, but then water will build up to this level, release water from Volvo dam and. 


 Bushman's estuary, finding bait. 

5 Types of estuaries. 

Defined by Allan Whitfield. 

Hydrology 

## Review

### Inorganic
does not contain inorganic Carbon hydrogen bonds. inorganic compound. 

There is an eqillibrium between the partial pressure of $CO_2$ in water and the gasseous form, i.e. partial pressure, (check out this?) 

## Esturary defining characteristics.
72% of estuaries are open closed. 
tidal

ORichard in 1967 an estuary is a semi, encolsed coastal body of water wich has a free connnection with the open sean and within which sea water is measurably ---

National biodiversity assesmment definition;

body of surface, water part of a water course that is perminently or periodically open to the sean (b) whic is a rise anf fall od the ater as ar results of the tides is meansuambe at sproing tides when the water course, the salinity of the land can become hypersaline due to salt run off. 

in st lucia, the mouth closedextented so up to 180, only extrememophiles bacteria can survivie, problem is semiment from sugarcain farming. sediment also courses mouth closing. 

define factors
tidal whenm open 
gradient in salinity when open 
mouth of the estuary can be open or closed. 

NB; sea water typically salt concent of 35PSU, usually two high and two low tides per day with a spring tide ever two weeks. 

fresh water more dense than salt water. esturaries shallower than 2m wind mixing can break down halocline nad associated pycnoline stratification. 


types of estuaries 

shape (geomorphology of an estuari is determined by factors such as 
maount of rain, catachment size, supply and characterisitics of fluvial and marrrine sediment, water currents/ hydrodynamics, (include costal porcesses))


fluvial dominated by quartsite and silicate. 

water dynamics, cannel like cut straint through, or onto flood plain, so dissapates all force. wave action affects the mouth sidze, and where the waves fall in the mounth/ how high up they extend.

NBA in 20011 indentified 289 esturies including microesturaries from subtropical to temerate. 

whitfield 5 diffs types (specific to south africa). 
 #. permanently open. can be protected by rock headlands. 
 #. temporarily open closed estuaries (river dominantetly large river catchemtns, affect of fresh water far out to sea)
 #. river mouth
 #. esterioan lakes 
 #. estuarian bays.

 lots of densely packed estuaries along estern coast, due to high rainfall, and steep gradient of land many river catchemnts formed which contribute to esturary formation. 

 In perminately open estuaries, on west coast, high tide can push in very cold nutrient rich riverwith lwo river flow bring in cold nutrinet rich water boosting productivity. 

 can  have very high flow through mouth, full longitudinal salinity gradient. 
 vertical salinity stratification, dependnat on tidal cycle, river inflow and channel depth profile. 

 relatively strong halokilne change of greater than 10 PSU in depth profile. river typically less tha o.5 0.5-5 oligohaline, 5-18 mesohaline, 18-30, polyhaline, o.5-30 in brachish. >30 euhaline. does change around the tropics. 

 global profile, lower by equator higher by poles, find graph W shaoe (why). there can be months or years withou any water from river, so no startification (haloine), if large flood (eg crom estuary), over 35PSU, as freshwaterflwos over mmarrine thin layer flows over top and out to sea, no change in productivity. 

 Ideal from 0-35PSU polt shown by isohaline lines. 

 alot of animals and plants adapt to this salt fluctuation, / itdal environemtn 

 perinantly open 
 typicall large river catachments with perrenical flow. Intertidal flats, typical of subtropics. 

 lots of eel grass.

 fragmaties on banks . 

 Temporarily open closed. 
 the catchemtn is typically quite samll, the river flow is periodic or seasonal. close in dry winters and break opne in wetter summers. 

 mangroves can die if not sufficeint tiday flushing. 

 there are two ttypes of waters, desctructive waves, high energy hits steep beack backflow pulls off sediment, little sediment deposited. high intensity high rate of waves. creates steeep narrow beach. very tall breakers, breaking downwards with great force. 

 low enrgy waves, disperated all along the beach strong swatch (moviment of sand up the beach). very gental sloping in a wide beach. 

 COPY IMAGE
 reflective beach, dissipative beach. disturbance upsets equilibbrium. disaapated does not require as much fresh water flwo to stay open to the sea, for the estuary. feshwater used for gas refinary, money on grader to break snad bar required. 

 TOCE esturaries, scull and remove seidment, but subsiquent in fillling is rapid. clay, attatches to organic matter, and flocculates out. breached at lower level means less coring of organic matter, so becomes eutrophic. a perched estuary is one in which, a high sandbar forms around the estuary, high bar, some estuary slowely seeps through bar, so water in esutary is higher than the water in the marrine environement. once it odes break through the bar can be very erroisve. 

 Coditions in TOCE can range from open and fresh throughout, to full salinity gradient, to clsoed homogenous (often high salt content).

 once closed mixing is by wid. 

 in spring high tide there can be overtopiingof highly saline water, brakish or bubbles, highl density naerobic highly saline layer at the bottom, salinity exceeds 40 parts per thousand. Difference is sand due to strength of wind(?), courses sand leads to mroe seepage, such as KZN south coast is fine sand. 

 barrier overwash/ strom surge, spring high tide. 
 artificial breaching is common practice, to prevent flooding of low lying properties. bracash water upstrem or flooding, then decision to breach system

 Big esturine lakes, 

 Areas around sedge field, cosi bae, grron veld. 

 big lake behind big dune system, with small passage to sea, which can be perminnant seasonaly or  intermitent. 

 12 m deep lake, very anoxic, pine lake marine, rotten e.g. smell from sulfur bacteria, surpantine from tow river, back to Wilderness itself. Flooding due to rising sea levels forms there lakes. 
sulfur
 Salinity determined by the balance between river input and evaporation and duration of the marine connection. Duration of marine connection 

 Flood force dissipated so little mixing wind mixing dominant but only on surface, so strong halocline with anoxic depths. Estuarine bays may be natural (e.g. Knysna) or partly artificial through dredging (e.g. Durban bay ). Very large tidal prism, > 1om cubic meters on full spring tide, effective tidal flushing of estuarine water. 

 Mixing driven predominately by the tide. 

upwelling leads to cold nutrient rich water intruding into the system contributing to productivity. 

Flood water pushes marine water down stream, flood forces all the way down to lower reaches of estuary, change sin depth with flood, stronger tide leads to marine moving higher up estuary. 
always strong longitudinal gradient tide very evident. 

red tides can also enter from the marine environment into the estuarine system, which is a huge problem for oyster farming, oyster nets had to be removed. 


river mouths

river dominated, lots of rainfall slowly moves down. Intrusion of marine water and the tidal prism are small. Very low tidal prism.

temporarily open closed systems. Full range from fresh to hypersaline. 

Langerbaan lagoon, seepage of freshwater from sediment, forms a salt marsh where the water seeps out. Put in as a special case so that it can be managed as an estuary but does not fall into the classical five types. 


Common reeds. 
phramateies. 

Tides and currents 


## Review
temporarily open closed estuary 
For example Umthlanga. , and great Brak. Tend to become eutrophic and very little tidal exchange, not very resilient, flooding on a regular basis helps to flush out the estuary. 


Permanently open 
For example
swartkop , Mnceno

Estuarine bay 
for example turban harbour, and Knysa heads. 
More resilient to becoming eutrophic due to scouring by sea water


River mouth 
Thukeva organic

>NOTE: Course sand indicates that the area is very corrosive/ disturbed. 

At the mouth sediment is well flushed and bacterial activity low. in fine mud in middle reaches a few mm deep already turn black/ anoxic. Living in the sand mainly colonizers. 

Estuarine lake
Swartvlei kosi bay.

Tidal variation depends largely on how wide or deep the estuary mouth is, Hydrodynamics determine how much water is needed to keep mouth open. There is a time delay between the high tide and the maximum water coming into the estuary can be up to several hours. In Kariega there is a 3 hour delay sea water pushes 18km in. In the normal tidal cycle there is normally a well developed flood tide delta and a much smaller ebb tide delta, which can be related to water power when pushing in and draining out. 

If sediment deposition (blocking forces exceed scouring forces estuary is likely to close, river flow vs sediment deposition), periodic floods are absolutely essential in removing accumulated sediment. Salinity is important factor responsible for regional differences within an estuary and is a function of river and marine inputs. Strong flood can bake estuary completely fresh evaporation can lead to hypersalinity in closed mouth estuaries. As water temperature increases oxygen concentration decreases. Photosynthesis increases with temperature, to a point so more oxygen is added to the water column, which balances/ and overpowers the solubility decreases. The amount of decaying organic matter is also important, salinity and density stratification can lead to a decrease in dissolved oxygen. Shallow tend to be better mixed than for deeper ones. Hypoxia <4$mg\cdot L^{-1}$, or even anoxia, which animals will normally avoid as it is very stressful. 

Substrate can range from sand to mud or may be sand throughout is there so not sufficient space for deposition. Clay leads to flocculation by attraction to other clay particles and other particles in general such as diatoms. As such the sediment formed in reach in organic matter which decays, decomposers use up all of the available oxygen so becomes anoxic within millimeters of the surface, anaerobic sulfur bacteria thrive in these conditions. In tannin stained rivers the water is acidic/ 4-6, southern cape. PH of rivers normally ranges from about 8 to 9. Marine environment 7.8-8.2.

Water turbidity Secchi depth or mg L^{-1} is typically highest in the upper reaches (river input especially under high flow conditions. 

>NOTE: dark stained water can still have high clarity due to very low suspended load. 

Boundary between estuary and freshwater is dictated by salinity so 0.5, however may only go fresh downstream of tidal influence so which every reaches higher between salinity and tidal reach is used. The mouth is defined by the coast line even though there can be considerable flow of fresh water out to sea. In south Africa the 5m contour is used to determine the protected range around the estuary. 

>NOTE: There was a lot of development before 5meter rule so there is still a lot within the zone, new development in the zone is strictly regulated. 

### Organisms stresses

#### Water column 
salinity
temperature
light. 

>NOTE: osmotic regulation is required, estuarine animals are ideally Euhaline. 
Stenohaline (meaning narrow range) marine are adapted to marine, and some species are adapted to brackish water, some are Stenohaline fresh. 

If the environment is hypotonic, must adapt, behaviourally, or physiologically. Crabs and snails burrow down, perculum used by snails which wait, inside the shell in a closed off environment. Some organisms are perfect osmoconformers. 

Many fish crabs and molluscs are osmoregulators, can get rid of water by active transport (transfer of substance across a membrane against concentration gradient using energy). 

Fresh water fish, look for salty food, dilute urine, try to conserve salt, this is for marine fish,
Kidneys regulate salt loss in urine. 

hwater eels are almost perfect osmoregulators, and so are samon oligochateae are conformers, crab try to regulate but not well

#### Sediment
oxygen. 
temperature.



# Introduction 

## Common mistakes. 
 #. Statements require references, must be background before aim, must have a logical flow . Peer reviewed scientific papers are required as reference material. Objectives and hypothesise should link well, i.e state objective + how it will be achieved. In comparisons make sure that they are complete. Speak in dispassionate third person. Avoid loose expressions/ high/ low scientifically accurate descriptor required. AS in High means above this given level. Make context very broad to start with, this will imply more aims/hypothesis. A clear research question is required. 

To fix 1 gC plant must trasnpire 750g, 45\% organic metter is C therefore 1.7kg of water must be losr If in seawater 58g of salt woulld accumulate which wouldbe toxic. GLycophytes tollerate only very low salt concnetrations, halophies are salt loving, very few can survive full seawater salinity, most are esturine. 

## Physical adaAptions
Plants are capable to a point of restricting ions entering the xylem 

Apoplastic flow. Moves through cell walls and eventually reaches casperian strip where it is unable to continue flowing through the cell walls. 
-
Symplastic flow through cells, (salt concentration regulated/ reduced), by time the water has reached the xylem salt is already reduced by about 90\% ions can also be removes as water flows up the xylem. Salts can also be placed into older leaf, leaf stem, or leaf sheath, or vacuole. 

Salt bladders, or salt glands, Trichomes, small structures look like hairs, balloon like epidermal cells on the leaf surface. 
Salt glands are stab;e strictires formed from two cells transport toxic ions to the plant exterior. 


Clams live with syphon, pop it out of the mud, Some borrowers live within the mud, burrow a U shaped burrow creating a circulation of water through the burrow and filter feeding as it does so. 

Blood worms, high concentrations of heamoglobin so can take up oxygen very efficiently. Why are anoxic sediments a problem for roots because the root cells still need to respire, so roots go down then spread out 30-40 meters away from the tree, then Pneumatophoes/ pencil like roots, knee roots, and stilt/ prop roots which are adapted to get oxygen down to subsurface streams which are aerenchyma which are open channels formed by removed/ death of cells creating channels which are can flow through. 

The flow from estuary from ocean supports massive fisheries and nurseries on the coastal shelf. The nutrient cycling in estuaries is easily disturbed. 

Eutrophication is the entire process of overconsumption, decomposition and anoxia. The more impacted water is the higher the treatment coast, trees and reeds for harvest, boating transport, cultural. 


Changes of state imply large community shifts, Oligotrophic low levels of organic  matter tend to be deep and clear, oxygen. 

A dead zone is an areas where oxygen levels fall below 2ppm, dead zone as Mississippi flows out. 

Nutrient sources, in a well flushes system more water column with reduced water flow cycling with sediment is more important benthopelagiic coupling. Estuaries filter + transform nutrients. 

dilution from marine leads to conservative, or there can be higher nutrients in the middle reaches, low flow middle reaches deposition and the benthos pelagic coupling, or is estuary acting as sink as nutrients accumulate and to clay and are taken up by algae leading to a decrease in the middle regions. Hydrodynamic and chemical regimes determine the extent to which coastal areas 

increase in river cycling leads to decrease in restive importance of river discharge. Can be spacial or temporal. Closed estuary has maximum internal cycling, flooding estuary nutrient cycling rather happens out to sea. 

nitrogen, phosphorous and silicon are the primary nutrients for coastal. (Silicon are used by diatoms), distinctive shape so useful as a trophic index, if Si low then they do no appear in the phytoplankton. Si cycling is not highly impacted  by humans. 

Ammonium nitrate and nitrite are all part of dissolved inorganic nitrogen. 

metabolised protein based compounds, such as amino acids are metabolised to the toxic gas ammonia, in the case of fish and amphibian ammonia is excrete directly through their skins or? Terrestrial mammals must conserve water and so produce urea instead, which is then excreted. Birds and reptiles produce uric acid. Nitrogen is oxidised from ammonium to nitrite to nitrate.  

Marine dominated estuaries lead to elevated nutrient levels out at sea, increased atmospheric deposition, ground water inputs very difficult/expensive to measure, as bore holes all around the estuary are required normally estimated as N and P is system known, cyanobacteria can fix atmospheric nitrogen.

Nitrogen cycle. 
Atmosphere and water. Nitrogen can dissolve into the water fixation taken $N_2$ to $NH_4^+$, incorporated to amino acids and proteins in assimilation. 
nitrogen fixation to ammonia is doe by notrignase, oxygen inhibits nitrogen activity. Free living diazontrophes, which are capable of fixing organic nitrogen, every nine or so vegetative cells there is one large heterocyst. The hetero cyst has thick cell wall limit oxygen has photosystem I but not photosystem 2 so reliant on vegetative cells for energy.

Nitrification
The oxidation of ammonium to nitrite, and then on to nitrate. 

Nitrosimonious, and the nitrabactor from nitreatite to nitrate. Temperature can influence the reaction. 

dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonia. 
nitrate to nitrite to ammonia. when there is no oxygen. 

denitirfication, nitrate reduced from nitrate to nitrogen gas. Redfield ratio (contense fo phytoplakton cell matches whats in environemtn with conserved ration of nutreints C:N:P, 106:16:1), $(CH_2O)_{106}{NH_3}_16+(H_3PO_4)\rightarrow 16CO_2+H_3PO_4+177H_2O+55N_2$

so overall nitrate is lost as $NO_2$ gas in the atmosphere 

>NOTE: This process is also dissimilatory. 

Deamination is the conversion of amino acids to ammonia. 

Liabline or refractory decomposition 

A community of mostly primary producers, TOC:TN very low. this is liabline where as refractors alo is inversted into celulose and ligin so higher TOC and longer decomposition time. 

	
